Well, you're asking me about how my father started collecting, and I have to tell you that I'm not 100% sure about this, but he was a good scholar, and he got interested in history.
Then he did some work down in Texas and began to get interested in Texas.
I think it all just sort of came along gradually and my father and mother weren't married until he was old.
10 years or more out of college.
Now he had already been a practicing lawyer, etc.
And I think that even begun to collect before he was married.
His mother and father were married in 1917.
I was born in 1918.
Father suffered the worst indignity that could possibly overcome a collector.
The depression came along.
He was active in financial matters and was very overextended at the time the crash came in 1929.
We children, of course, weren't aware of this, but
I'm sure my mother as well as my father was very aware in any event he had to sell Some of the things that he bought in the 20s
prize things that he'd bought and the remarkable thing is that after the depression was over and he survived and he began to come back financially he was able to regain i think every one of the items that he sold and in quite a few cases the same copies
And of course his connections with dealers, he always had a very good relationship with many dealers and I'm sure that was an estimable value in recovering these things.
Were you collecting?
Oh, no.
It's quite clear in my mind.
I was not a collector in my father's lifetime.
As you know, at his death, he provided that his collection be sold at auction.
He said to us children and my mother many times,
How could he tell what library that he wished to support, what item they wanted?
So the process that he chose was to put the collection up for sale and at the same time designate a certain amount of the proceeds to
I believe that this is all recorded, I believe.
I'm not telling you anything new.
It's all recorded.
The number of institutions that were just kind of in.
I was going to say 15, but you may be right.
In any event, that seemed to all of us like a very reasonable approach to this thing.
And in fact, of course, was one of the reasons why the sale did so well, because a number of these libraries used this provision in my father's will
to go to their supporters and say look we have a wonderful chance to buy some things and we'd like to see you match the street of the quest or whatever well it did work well the streeter collection is the great 20th century collection
Part of its pain derives from the fact that it was so old after his father's death.
He did not wish to leave it intact and have his name on it.
And I admire him for that.
He felt that he wanted other people to have the pleasure of collecting.
And to the extent of my own involvement,
Certainly what he did got me started because I went to the early sales, naturally interested in what was taking place, but then I got sort of involved in buying a few things.
What kinds of things did you start?
Well, that was it.
You see, some people have said to me,
Are you trying to duplicate your father's collection?
Well, absurd.
I never had that intention.
Would not have been able to carry it out if I had had the intention, and it wouldn't have made any sense.
My initial purchases were just sort of items of curiosity.
I thought for a while, perhaps I can develop some collection.
People from Europe who came over,
and examined the American experiment and wrote about the form of government and the form of agriculture and the organization of cities.
But that really wasn't a terribly interesting subject.
And after a couple of small maneuvers in that direction, I sort of dropped that.
And about the time that sale number four came along, I had started to
really focused my interest on voyages of discovery.
Now that was not a crime area of Dad's collecting interest,
in collecting early printing, some of the early accounts appeared in his collection.
And so quite a few of these were in catalog four, sale four.
I got sort of started there.
So you bought some of your father's things?
Yeah, I have about two dozen items from father's sale.
Do you think you'd have been pleased by how much you spent for these items as opposed to what he spent for them?
Well, Dad was a shrewd call financially, and I know that he would have been terribly pleased at the success of the sale financially because he was a shrewd investment man.
uh this of course was not the reason that he bought these books as an investment because he spent oh he retired from acting business after world war ii and he didn't die about 1965 so he was 20 years uh really devoting himself to his collection he had a librarian and a secretary full-time
in our home in Morristown, New Jersey.
And he devoted most of every day, or a good bit of every day.
He'd go in and for quite some time he'd go to New York for an office in New York.
Oh, maybe once a week or twice a week.
And then, let's say, in the last years of his life, he probably went once every couple of months or something like that.
He'll be right now.
American Aquarian.
He was on the... I think he was on the John... Yes, he was.
He was a strong supporter of the John Carter Brown Library.
That's Dr. Tom Adams down there.
Yes, yes.
Well, Lawrence Roth was an old friend of my father's, or became an old friend of my father's.
So I would say that...
American Antiquarian and John Carter Brown were certainly two.
He must have had something to do with the Clements, I would think, as well.
Well, you know, he was involved because those libraries were collecting in the same...
and when he felt that that was completed he stopped
That collection went to Yale.
He had a good connection with Archie.
But they bought it.
I mean, that was not a gift to Yale.
They bought it.
He was glad to have it go to Yale, but it wasn't a gift.
Yale was through a wall.
Well, much of my book is about hopes to describe the passion of the collector.
Perhaps you can describe your father's thoughts about that.
Secondly, did you share his passion?
Of course, you can describe the passion that he had for the books.
Did it dominate his life?
How he told you he became so interested in books and collecting?
My father was not outwardly a passionate man.
He was a very reasonable man.
I'm sure that he had great dedication in various areas, obviously in his book area.
But he didn't, as far as we children were concerned, it was just his activity.
It was just...
other fathers did other things we knew that dad was finally interested in this but it was not an area that he that he talked to us about a great deal or at least he didn't talk to me about it my sister was at home during the war
She's some years younger than I. My two brothers and I were off in the war, I think maybe at that time, and my mother was off in the war as women commander of the Women Marine Corps.
So she was off, and my sister was home a good bit, and she may have had more opportunity to learn from us.
As far as I was concerned, the picture I have of my father is actually personified in a crayon drawing that somebody did at the time of him sitting at a big table in his studies.
which used to be our playroom.
And I know that we felt rather miffed when we were ousted from the playrooms and beg room for my father's study.
But in any event, we had a great long table there.
and covered with papers, and his payon drawing shows him sitting at the table with the two table lamps.
His briefcase is on the floor beside him, but he's looking at a catalog or whatever.
So we knew about his deep involvement and also a continuous stream of people in and out of the house, fellow collectors and dealers, librarians.
My father was very interested in
exchanging gossip and talking to and keeping in touch with a great many people in his field.
And I think they all, he was a very hospitable man, and so was my mother.
And all these people were made welcome in our home, and I think they all enjoyed it.
So we did see that that was an area.
Did Bradley Martin come out?
Oh, I don't think that.
There are not so many other collectors.
Well, Bradley Martin would have been a good bit younger, I think, wouldn't he?
A bit younger, yes.
I mean, he was fairly reclusive himself.
Well, yes.
He probably wouldn't have been interested, I don't know.
Well, Dad was not reclusive at all about his collection.
You see, by the time the war was over, I was on my own.
In fact, my brothers and all of us were on our own by that time, and we were not living at home.
When we were out visiting, there was no particular occasion to actually go.
I have to say that, no, I was not personally interested in what made up the collection.
I was obviously interested that my father found this such a commanding interest, interested in the people that came, and many of them were extremely interesting people.
Do you think this amused other members as a family?
I mean, if you see this so often,
I wouldn't say there's any sense of amusement about it, or even bemusement.
This is just Dad's thing.
Other fathers did other things that they spend a lot of money We didn't know that he spent a lot of money on it.
I mean if we never my father certainly never discussed his finances with any of his children I mean in those days he didn't I Don't think any of us were aware of the
I think of course it brought a lot more than anybody expected.
When did you discover that?
At the sale?
Oh, sure.
I wouldn't say that any of us.
My sister conceivably might have had, but I don't think so.
Father never made a fuss about it.
It was just something he did.
uh when he didn't talk about it to any great degree with us and then we all had other things that we were interested in i think it's also important to point out he is almost the the archetypical scholar collector i mean this is a man
to not only collect it, but he basically paved the way.
I mean, his catalogs were still the standard.
That's right.
He absolutely devised certain areas of collection.
I mean, the bibliographical record, in many respects, is much bigger.
No, an extraordinarily intelligent way.
Extraordinary intelligence collection, I think that's... But I think Dad would be the first to say that he benefited from the sources that he used, I mean, the dealers, the librarians.
My father was a student of human nature as well as financial behavior, a scholarly person into the bargain.
And he fully believed in mining the accumulated wealth of knowledge of other people.
Now, he absorbed it very much himself, and I think it's wonderful that he put it back onto the market, so to speak, with his cattle hogs, as you say.
Do your children collect?
No.
I can't afford to collect.
Well, actually, somebody said that to me the other day, and I said, that's baloney.
I mean, you know, you depend upon collects.
Let's put it this way.
I suppose some children collect baseball cards and all kinds of things.
Well, they're more valuable.
But now, of course, they might be getting out to be very valuable.
Who would believe that one card could be worth, you know, quite as much as a Chamberlain.
Or as much as a Columbus letter.
Yeah.
I was not a collector as a child at all.
I was not a collector later my father died and started focusing on what he'd done.
Did you make that true of my brothers and my sister?
No, no, no, no.
Who was the owner of this?
It's not written.
It wasn't identified in the catalog.
It wasn't identified in the catalog, but in fact, because the owner initially didn't want to be identified, but then it became, from general knowledge, a man named Copeland.
Bill Copeland from California.
She earned a chain of sporting goods stores.
But he owned this for a long time?
No, he hadn't actually.
He put together this collection really over the last five or six years, a really short time.
Which also meant that it was conceivably more of a challenge to tell us.
I think it was absolutely genuinely a question of trying to put together a
the best of everything in terms of what's memorabilia.
And I think one has to be very careful about using the word speculation because, I mean, obviously anybody who spends a lot of money on a book or a work of art or even a baseball card doesn't want to have the feeling that you're spending it on something which is worthless tomorrow.
I mean, you would then feel very guilty towards your spouse and your family and god knows what else.
So you would have a feeling the value is somehow retained there.
But I don't think that's speculation.
I think sometimes it's used as a crutch
particularly with one's family.
I mean, I know that Bradley Martin would explain to Mrs. Martin that, in fact, the collection was extremely valuable, and it was a worthwhile enterprise, also, because at that point, that was not why Bradley Martin collected the awful record of art everywhere.